---
layout: post
title:  "An immutable optional"
date:   2022-03-10 20:34:00 +0100
---

## Immutability

Since at least functional programming gained more and more popularity among programmers outside the academic sphere,
immutable data is considered a good thing. C++ supports the immutability of variables or objects in form of the `const`
key word since its early days (see [The Design and Evolution of C++](https://www.stroustrup.com/dne.html) for reference): if we
declare a variable with this keyword, we may not alter it's value after initialization.

{% highlight cpp %}

// initialize a constant
const int x = 5;
// modification is forbidden by the compiler
x = 6;
{% endhighlight %}

Making as many variables and objects immutable immutable is considered a best practice in the C++ community:

* Item 21 of Scott Meyers' 
[Effective C++](https://www.pearson.com/us/higher-education/program/Meyers-Effective-C-55-Specific-Ways-to-Improve-Your-Programs-and-Designs-3rd-Edition/PGM73417.html)
recommends to "Use const whenever possible."
* Item 15 of [C++ Coding Standards: 101 Rules, Guidelines, and Best Practices](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/c-coding-standards/0321113586/) 
by Herb Sutter and Andrei Alexandrescu advises us to "Use const proactively."
* Even John Carmack seems to like 'const' (have a look at his comment under [this articel](https://kotaku.com/the-exceptional-beauty-of-doom-3s-source-code-5975610)).
* Consequentially  the C++ Core Guidelines have a whole section on [Constants and immutablility](https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#S-const)
containting [Con.1](https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#Rconst-immutable) which states: "by
default, make objects immutable".

A few of the most frequently mentioned reasons for using `const` as much as possible are:
* Ease of reasoning about a piece of code: we don't need to keep track of state changes of variables if there aren't any.
* The compiler enforces constants to be unchanged: this may turn some programming errors into compiler errors.
* Immutability can be very helpful in [multithreaded contexts](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UJrmee7o68A).
* Striving for constness helps to avoid the
["Initialize Then Modify" Antipattern](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vOgyn1jcKGY).

These arguments should be conclusive enough to convince us that immutability is a good thing and that therefore our
optional should support immutability. We shoudn't make the members of our optional constant though! If we would do that,
we would use /assignability/. As soon as one member of a class/struct is `const`, assignment on this object is
disallowed, because this would require to reassign a constant, which is impossible. As our optional should keep being a
[regular type]({% post_url 2022-01-23-regular-optional %}), we should refrain from this idea
([C.12](https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#Rc-constref) also advises us to not to make data
members `const`).


But the least we can do is making sure that our optional may be declared and used as a constant.

## Constant optionals in the tests

So the first thing, we should do, is to use constant optionals in our tests; for example in these two cases:

{% highlight cpp %}
TEST_CASE("A default constructed value is not set.") {
  const optional_unsigned_int x;
  REQUIRE(x.has_value() == false);
}

TEST_CASE("An optional constructed with a value is set and stores the value.") {
  unsigned int anyValue = 10;
  const optional_unsigned_int x(anyValue);
  REQUIRE(x.has_value() == true);
  REQUIRE(x.value() == anyValue);
}
{% endhighlight %}

But if we try to build our tests now, we will get a compiler error: `passing ‘const optional_unsigned_int’ as ‘this’
argument discards qualifiers`.

## Member functions and constants

In order to understand this, we should take a step back and have a look on a reduced version of our optional.

{% highlight cpp %}
class optional_unsigned_int {
 public:
  optional_unsigned_int()
      : mHasValue(false) {}

  optional_unsigned_int(unsigned int value)
      : mHasValue(true)
      , mValue(value) {}

  bool has_value() {
    return mHasValue;
  }

  unsigned int value() {
    return mValue;
  }

 private:
  bool mHasValue;
  unsigned int mValue;
};

{% endhighlight %}

For us as a reader, it is pretty clear, that none of the member functions `has_value()` and `value()` alters the classes
members, so for us there may be no particular reason, why it shouldn't be possible to call these functions on a constant
optional.

The reason is, that the compiler basically treats theses member function as if the we something like this:

{% highlight cpp %}
bool has_value(optional_unsigned_int * this) {
  return this->mHasValue;
}

unsigned int value(optional_unsigned_int * this) {
  return this->mValue;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Every non-static member function takes a pointer to the object, the function is called on, as the `this` pointer.
If these member functions are declared as we did above, the `this` pointer points to a non-const/mutable object.
But we can not pass an object which has been declared to be `const` to a function, which takes a pointer to a non-const
object. This is, because these function may alter the object via this pointer, which is not allowed for constants.

{% highlight cpp %}
optional_unsigned_int mutuable_x;
unsigned int x1 = value(x); // compiles

const optional_unsigned_int mutuable_x;
unsigned int x1 = value(x); // error
{% endhighlight %}

With this knowledge, the compiler error we encountered above starts to make sense. We actually passed a `const
optional_unsigned_int` as `this` which is -- in this case -- a pointer to a non-const `optional_unsigned_int` and this
discards the `const` qualifier, which isn't allowed.

So what can we do about this issue? We need to make the `this` pointer a pointer to a *constant*. This is done by adding
`const` to the function definitions.

{% highlight cpp %}
class optional_unsigned_int {
 // ...
  bool has_value() const {
    return mHasValue;
  }

  unsigned int value() const {
    return mValue;
  }

 // ...
  unsigned int mValue;
};
{% endhighlight %}

This `const` applies to the `this` pointer implicitly passed to the member function: `optional_unsigned_int * this`
becomes to `const optional_unsigned_int * this`. With this addition, we can now call these two member functions on a
constant optional, we implies that out tests are compiling again without any errors now.

With this addition, out optional also complies to
[Con.2](https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#Rconst-fct) of the C++ Core Guidelines: "by
default, make member functions `const`". We also understand now, why this rule makes sense: it enables the said member
functions to be called on `const` objects.

## Conclusion

Our optional is now pretty much usable: it protects it's invariant, is regular and is *const correct*. As it is, it
would be pretty much ready for everyday use. Now we can finally start to generalize it in order to get closer to the
actual `std::optional` implementation.
