---
layout: post
title:  "A templated optional"
date:   2022-04-03 21:31:00 +0100
---

## A concrete optional

Since at least the last [post]({% post_url 2022-03-20-const %}) our optional is finally (at least somewhat)
feature complete and ready for use.

* It serves a specific purpose (which is holding either a value or no value at all) defined by its
[invariant]({% post_url 2022-01-02-class-invariants %}).
* It has a interfaces which is arguably [easy to use correctly and hard to use incorrectly]({% post_url 2021-12-29-constructors %}).
* It is [regular]({% post_url 2022-01-23-regular-optional %}), which allows for broad use, e.g. in
  combination with the STL.
* It is [const correct]({% post_url 2022-03-20-const %}).

But out optional is limited the values of type `unsigned int`. This is unfortunate: technically -- especially in C++ --
there is no reason to limited our self to just one type: we can use
[C++'s templates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template_(C%2B%2B)).

## A generalized optional

Currently, the value type used in our optional `unsinged int` is spread all over our implementation; most importantly in
the declaration of its `mValue` but additionally in the constructor and the `value()` member function.

{% highlight cpp %}

class optional_unsigned_int {
 public:
  // ...
  optional_unsigned_int(unsigned int value) {
  //...
  unsigned int value() const {
  //..
 private:
   //...
   unsigned int mValue;
};

{% endhighlight %}

In order to make out optional work with any other type, we need to replace all occurrences of `unsigned int` with a
placeholder. Let's call it `T` (for "type"). This can be done by simple text replacement; basically every test editor or
IDE can do this.

But this isn't enough. The compiler will complain, that `T` "does not name a type". We need to tell the compiler, that
`T` is just a placeholder for a type. This is done by using the `template` keyword in front of the class definition.
This keyword turns a class into a template class.

{% highlight cpp %}
template<typename T>
class optional_unsigned_int {
 public:
  // ...
  optional_unsigned_int(T value) {
  //...
  T value() const {
  //..
 private:
   //...
   T mValue;
};
{% endhighlight %}

In the angle brackets `<` and `>` the template's list of parameters is given. If a parameter is mean to denote a type,
either `typename` or `class` must precede the name. I prefer `typename` over `class`, because it is a bit more precise,
as `T` actually names a type and is not necessarily a `class`.

Now our optional is a template, but with a rather silly name! It doesn't make any sense to have `_unsigned_int` as part
of our optionals name, so we can just remove it.

{% highlight cpp %}
template<typename T>
class optional_unsigned_int {
 public:
  // ...
  optional(T value) {
  //...
  friend bool operator ==(optional a, optional b) {
  //...
  T value() const {
  //..
 private:
   //...
   T mValue;
};
{% endhighlight %}

Please note, that we are using `optional` instead of `optional<T>` in the definitions of the signatures of the
comparison operators. We can do this, because we are in the definition of `optional<T>`. If we had defined these
functions outside of the class definition, we couldn't do that. Inside of this class definition `optional` and
`optional<T>` can basically be used interchangeably. I decided to use the former, because it is simpler and less
repetitive.

Now our optional is `optional<T>` instead of `optional_unsigned_int`. But now, our test won't compile, because the are
written in terms of `optional_unsigned_int`, which is not defined anymore. For the time being, we can fix this by
introducing a `typedef` for our tests.

{% highlight cpp %}
typedef optional<unsigned int> optional_unsigned_int;
{% endhighlight %}

Now our tests are working again. Actually, from a testing point of few, we didn't change anything. `optional<unsigned
int>` will actually basically generate the same code as `optional_unsigned_int` did. If we use `optional<unsigned int>`, the
compiler will replace all occurrences of `T` in the class definition with `unsigned int`, hence _instantiate_ the
template class. This _instantiantion_ of the template class will behave like the original `optional_unsigned_int` did.
Essentially, the compiler will roll back our changes, we did to our implementation in this post.

We can actually (at least for such simple cases without `template specializations`) think of template instantiation as
simple replacement. In [The Design and Evolution of C++](https://www.stroustrup.com/dne.html) Bjarne Stroustrup explains,
that before he invented templates, he tried to solve similar problems by using the C preprocessor (which does basically
nothing else then test replacement). He invented templates to overcome some of the weaknesses of this approach. If you
want to dive deeper into this topic, I recommend reading this book to you. It gives great insights in the early history
of C++ and explains really well the reasons, why many things in the language are like they are.

## Conclusion

Well, that was easy! Replacing `unsigned int` with a `T`, adding a `template<typename T>` and introducing a better name
was enough to generalize our optional. Actually this post was intended to take a bit of the fear about writing template
classes from you: it is basically as easy as this; at least it can be.

But this generalized optional is far from being optimal. For build-in types like `int`, `char` or `float` is will work
quite well, though. But for other -- more complex -- types, this is not the case. In the upcoming posts, we will have a
look at the issues, which may arise with this rather naive implementation as soon as we are using it with such more
complex types.

