---
layout: post
title:  "A trivial Copy"
date:   2022-03-06 21:11:00 +0100
---

## Recap Regularity

[A few posts ago]({% post_url 2022-01-23-regular-optional %}) we set the goal to make our optional.
Until now, we implemented almost all of them.

| Operation | C++ Syntax | State of Implementation |
|-----------|------------| ------------------------|
| default constructor | `T a;` | implemented in ["Constructors for valid optionals"]({% post_url 2021-12-29-constructors %}) |
| copy constructor | `T a = b;` | not implemented yet |
| assignment | `a = b;` | not implemented yet |
| equality | `a == b` | implemented in ["Equality and Inequality"]({% post_url 2022-02-13-equality-inequality %}) |
| inequality | `a != b` | implemented in ["Equality and Inequality"]({% post_url 2022-02-13-equality-inequality %}) |
| ordering | `a < b` | implemented in ["Ordering Optionals"]({% post_url 2022-02-20-order %}) |

Only *copy construction* and *assignment* are left. As both operations are basically creating a *copy* of an optional,
we will cover them both at once.

One may come up with a definition of *copy*, that involves copying all members one by one, but as we already defined
*equality*, it is easier -- I suppose -- to define *copy* in terms of *equality*:

> An optional and it's copy are equal.

Yes, it's as simple as that. For our current optional implementation, this is completely sufficient.

## Deriving Tests

We can now derive test cases from this definition. We have to cover two different operations: *copy construction* and *assignment*.
Additionally we should cover optionals *with* and *without* a value for both operations. This makes a total of four
tests.

{% highlight cpp %}
TEST_CASE("An optional and its copy are equal.") {
  SECTION("copy constructor without a value") {
    optional_unsigned_int x;
    optional_unsigned_int y(x);
    REQUIRE(x == y);
  }

  SECTION("copy constructor with a value") {
    unsigned int anyValueX = 5;
    optional_unsigned_int x(anyValueX);
    optional_unsigned_int y(x);
    REQUIRE(x == y);
  }

  SECTION("copy assignment without a value") {
    optional_unsigned_int x;
    optional_unsigned_int y;
    y = x;
    REQUIRE(x == y);
  }

  SECTION("copy assignment with a value") {
    unsigned int anyValueX = 5;
    optional_unsigned_int x(anyValueX);
    optional_unsigned_int y;
    y = x;
    REQUIRE(x == y);
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

Please note that I have chosen to use a single `TEST_CASE` and multiple `SECTION`s. Each of this `SECION`s introduces
it's own [scope](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/cpp/scope-visual-cpp?view=msvc-170), so we can reuse the variable
names. We could also have created four different test cases. Before we get to the reason, why I didn't, let's have a
look at a neat little feature of *catch*:  the `--list-test-names-only` flag. If you pass it to a test executable, it
will print out a list of all test names. If we do so with our test executable `./test_optionalcpp
--list-test-names-only`, we get this output.

{% highlight md %}
A default constructed value is not set.
An optional constructed with a value is set and stores the value.
Two optionals without a value are equal.
Two optionals with equal values are equal.
An optional with a value and an unsigned value with the same value are equal.
An optional without a value is less then an optional with a value (they are unequal).
An optional 'x' is less than an optional 'y' if the value of 'x' is smaller than the value of 'y' (they are unequal).
An optional and its copy are equal.
{% endhighlight %}

This now reads more like a description of our optional's features. We explicitly have chosen to name our tests in a way,
that the become ["they are executable specification" ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SUIUZ09mnwM&t=659s). Using this
flag, we can now actually print out the *specification* of our optional. 

Getting back to the question, why I have chosen to add *one* test case with four sections instead of *four* test cases,
you might have already a rough idea about my reason. Above we came up with *one* simple rule, how copy is supposed to work. This rule should
be sufficient -- more rules are not needed. Using the "one test cases, four sections"-approach, we have added one more line to our list of
test names. With the "four test cases" approach we would have added *four* test names. This would have somewhat polluted
our list of test names -- and therefore our *specification*. The *specification*, as it is now, is pretty concise, which
is nice.

If we now compile our tests and run them, we will see that *they all pass*!. We didn't do anything the make the pass. How can that be?

## Trivial Types

Our optional, as it is right now, has tow members: an *boolen* (`bool`) and a *integer* (`unsigned int`). Both of them
are *scalar types* build into the language and therefore they are
[trivial copyable](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/named_req/TriviallyCopyable). In general this means, that both of
them can be copied byte by byte without any issues (please note, you can not do that with types like e.g. `std::string` which contain (owning) pointers or references).
We can put it this way: *trivial copyable* types can be copied without using a *copy constructor* or *assignment*.
As both members of our optional are *trivial copyable* and we haven't defined neither a copy constructor, a copy
assignment operator, nor a destructor, our optional is *trivial copyable* as well. In this case, the compiler will
generate the needed copy constructor and the assignment operator for us: we don't need to define them.

Actually we shouldn't define them in this case because of basically two reasons:

* It is in general advisable to define none of these operations if not needed. This is also known as the 'rule of zero'
  or [C.20](https://github.com/isocpp/CppCoreGuidelines/blob/master/CppCoreGuidelines.md#Rc-zero) of the C++ Core
  Guidelines.
* As soon as we define *one* of these operations on our own, the class type becomes immediately *non-trivial*
([see this  tiny example in compiler explorer](https://godbolt.org/#g:!((g:!((g:!((h:codeEditor,i:(filename:'1',fontScale:14,fontUsePx:'0',j:1,lang:c%2B%2B,selection:(endColumn:1,endLineNumber:12,positionColumn:1,positionLineNumber:12,selectionStartColumn:1,selectionStartLineNumber:12,startColumn:1,startLineNumber:12),source:'%23include+%3Ctype_traits%3E%0A%0Astruct+Trivial+%7B%7D%3B%0A%0Astatic_assert(std::is_trivially_copyable%3CTrivial%3E::value,+%22%22)%3B%0A%0Astruct+NonTrivialCopyConstructor+%7B%0A++++NonTrivialCopyConstructor(NonTrivial+const%26)+%7B%7D%0A%7D%3B%0A%0Astatic_assert(std::is_trivially_copyable%3CNonTrivialCopyConstructor%3E::value,+%22%22)%3B%0A'),l:'5',n:'0',o:'C%2B%2B+source+%231',t:'0')),header:(),k:50,l:'4',n:'0',o:'',s:0,t:'0'),(g:!((h:compiler,i:(compiler:g112,filters:(b:'0',binary:'1',commentOnly:'0',demangle:'0',directives:'0',execute:'1',intel:'0',libraryCode:'0',trim:'1'),flagsViewOpen:'1',fontScale:14,fontUsePx:'0',j:1,lang:c%2B%2B,libs:!(),options:'',selection:(endColumn:90,endLineNumber:4,positionColumn:90,positionLineNumber:4,selectionStartColumn:90,selectionStartLineNumber:4,startColumn:90,startLineNumber:4),source:1,tree:'1'),l:'5',n:'0',o:'x86-64+gcc+11.2+(C%2B%2B,+Editor+%231,+Compiler+%231)',t:'0')),header:(),k:50,l:'4',n:'0',o:'',s:0,t:'0')),l:'2',n:'0',o:'',t:'0')),version:4)).
  It would be a shame, if a type which could be trivial is not, because of a superfluous copy constructor.
  There are places, where basically only trivial types can used, e.g.
  [std::atomic](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/atomic/atomic) (if no template specialization exists, which is
  usually not the case for user defined types).

If you want to dive deeper in to the topic of trivial types in C++, you should have a look at
[Jason Turners Talk "Great C++ is_trivial"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZxWjii99yao).

So, we are finished now: we have made our optional *regular*!

## Conclusion

In this post we got to know *trivial copyable* types and the 'rule of zero'. We now know for sure, that our optional is
*regular* now. Our optional is pretty much usable now, beside one remaining issue, which we will tackle in the upcoming
post.
