---
layout: post
title:  "Enter the void"
date:   2023-02-24 19:52:00 +0100
---

## The Discovery of a new useful function

While introducing the [swap function]({% post_url  2023-02-05-swap %}) we found it handy to modify
the already existing private member function `destructValue` in a ways which made it even more
useful:

{% highlight cpp %}
template <typename T>
class optional {
 // ...
 private:
 // ...
  void destructValue() {
    reinterpret_cast<T*>(&mBuffer.mStorage)->~T();
    mHasValue = false;
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

This function now does a bit more than "just" destroying the value stored in the optional -- 
it also sets `mHasValue` back to false. This *means* that it takes an optional *with* a value
and transforms it in an optional *without* a value.

This is actually a quite helpful operation to have. We can currently already do something like
by assigning an empty optional to the optional we want to be empty.

{% highlight cpp %}
optional<int> mValue(5);
REQUIRE(mValue);
mValue = optional<int>();
REQUIRE(not mValue);
{% endhighlight %}

This solution works but it is a bit cumbersome and also requires us to instantiate a whole second
option just to do the simple operation which `destrcutValue` basically already implements.

If we consider constructing an optional with a value to *set* it's value, we could also consider
the operation to remove said value from the optional to *reset* the optional. `reset` seems to
be a reasonable name for such a function -- this is also the
[name chosen in the C++ standard](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/optional/reset).

## Tests for `reset`

There are quite obviously two conditions which can occur when calling such a reset function:
1. the optional either has a value
2. or it hasn't.

In both cases we'd expect that after calling `reset()` the optional has no value anymore.

{% highlight cpp %}
TEST_CASE("reset destroys the value of an optional with a value.") {
  int anyValueX = 5;
  optional<int> mValue(anyValueX);
  REQUIRE(mValue);
  mValue.reset();
  REQUIRE(not mValue);
}

TEST_CASE(
    "After calling reset an optional without a value has still a value.") {
  optional<int> mValue;
  REQUIRE(not mValue);
  mValue.reset();
  REQUIRE(not mValue);
}
{% endhighlight %}

## The Implementation

After having a closer look at our test cases an `destrcutValue` we will quickly realize
that `reset` does a bit more than `destructValue`. `destrcutValue` has a 
[narrow contract]({% post_url 2022-08-23-narrow-wide-contracts %}): it requires `mStorage` to actually
contain a value of type `T`. Otherwise calling `~T` on this memory location is undefined behavior.
If we'd just rename `destructValue` to `reset` our second test case wouldn't work. Therefore we
need to add an additional check before calling `destructValue`.

{% highlight cpp %}
template <typename T>
class optional {
 // ...
  void reset() {
    if (mHasValue) {
      destructValue();
    }
  }
 // ...
}
{% endhighlight %}

With this implementation our test cases will pass and we'll never invoke undefined behavior.

## Conclusion

Based on a previously enhanced private member function we now can effortlessly *reset* and optional
calling `reset`. In a [previous post]({% post_url  2022-07-17-pointer-syntax %}) we already talked
about pointer's being also some kind of optional and used this analogy to motivate the introduction
of the pointer syntax to optional. At the time we only considered
[raw pointer](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/cpp/raw-pointers?view=msvc-170) (like they have
already been present in C), but there are (since C++11) *smart pointers* in the C++ standard like
[std::shared_ptr](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/shared_ptr) or 
[std::unique_ptr](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/unique_ptr) and (even earlier)
[boost::shared_ptr](https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_61_0/libs/smart_ptr/shared_ptr.htm).

All of these smart pointer implement a `reset` function:
* [std::shared_ptr::reset()](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/shared_ptr)
* [std::unique_ptr::reset()](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/unique_ptr/reset) and
* [boost::shared_ptr::reset()](https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_61_0/libs/smart_ptr/shared_ptr.htm#reset).

All of them (if no argument is supplied) reset the value of the pointer -- set the pointer to 
the NULL pointer and destroys the value (at least potentially). This gives us another reason
to have a function called `reset` within our optional: to not only be consistent with
raw pointers but with *smart pointers*, too.
